# Blended Wing Body

~

While taking MIT's undergraduate course in aerodynamics (known among MIT students as 16.100 or "sixteen one hundred"), I was assigned to a project team and instructed to design a Blended Wing Body (BWB) aircraft.  The following image is of a Boeing X48-B, a contemporary experimental aircraft that uses the Blended Wing Body geometry.

::image[Boeing X48-B Blended Wing Body][/media/bwb-example.jpg]

BWB aircraft offer many benefits, but its primary offering involves its increased efficiency in producing lift.  Traditional airplanes are composed of a fuselage with large wings attached.  The disadvantage of this design is that only the wings are capable in producing lift force, and the fuselage's large surface area creates large amounts of drag but no lift.  However, a BWB airplane's full surface area contributes meaningfully to lift production, because a BWB aircraft is in essence a giant wing.

This promise of increased lift production carries with it an improvement in fuel efficiency, which reduces fuel cost and the production of pollutants such as CO2 and organic particulates.

## Design Problem

The ultimate goal of our project was to design a passenger aircraft powered by liquid hydrogen that could carry a minimum of 300 passengers a distance of 14,140 kilometers.  For aircraft that satisfied this requirement, we sought the minimum value of the product of the aircraft's empty mass and its flight time to desired range (in units of kilogram-hours).

### Part I

We were provided a very simple "shell" for the aircraft and first asked to place liquid hydrogen (LH2) tanks and passenger (PAX) cabins inside the provided vehicle shell for maximal packing efficiency.

This analysis revealed that, though the provided geometry was capable of meeting parameters, it did so relatively inefficiently, with an objective function of 2,134,805 kg-hr.

### Part II

In the first study of Part II, we were given permission to vary the span and mean aerodynamic chord of the aircraft.  We increased the chord by 60% and reduced the span by 35% to achieve a 13% improvement (decrease) in the objective function to 1,849,500 kg-hr.

The image below depicts our final result for Part II, Study A.  The internal cylinders represent pressurized LH2 tanks and PAX cabins.

::image[Part II, Study A][/media/bwb-part-ii-a.png]

In the second study of Part II, we were given permission to modify the sweep angle and thickness while retaining the original model's span and mean aerodynamic chord.  We determined that increasing the thickness by 130% was optimal for our design.  Furthermore, reducing the sweep angle significantly increased our PAX capacity from 300 to 406.

The image below represents our final result for Part II, Study B.

::image[Part II, Study B][/media/bwb-part-ii-b.png]

### Part III

In the final part of this project, we were given permission to vary span, mean aerodynamic chord, thickness, and sweep angle to create a maximally efficient aircraft.

We searched the design space using both a Python script as well as a large number of computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations using the Flow360 web application.

The image below shows our final result for Part III.  By sweeping the aircraft's wings slightly, we were able to minimize the normal Mach number while simultaneously preserving the internal volume of the airframe.

::image[Part III Final Result][/media/bwb-part-iii.png]

The image below was generated by Flow360.  The blue lines on the wings represent sudden changes in air pressure due to normal shock waves developed on the wing.  These shock waves were introduced by erroneous methods we had used to model the flow across the wing.  We could have resolved this problem by further increasing the sweep angle of the wings; however, we lacked the computational resources and time to fix the error.

::image[Part III CFD Simulation][/media/bwb-simulation.png]

## Errors

During Part II, we used a simplified and inaccurate aerodynamic model to calculate the lift produced by the BWB.  We used an incompressible model, which did not account for the possibilities of shock waves developing on the aircraft.

However, we were flying close to Mach 0.8 in most tests, and so CFD simulations revealed shocks where our simplified model would not.  We chose to use our simplified model in the interest of saving both time and computing resources, without recognizing this major difference between the two models.

Therefore, we designed two aircraft in Part II that both would have created aggressive shock waves and therefore very low lift in their intended operating conditions.

## Credits

Thanks to MIT Professor Qiqi Wang for the original BWB aircraft design.

Thanks to my project team, Evan Boothe and Alexandra Mrozek.   They are both amazing people and I am extremely grateful to them for their presence, support, and diligence throughout the duration of our studies as well as this project.